The Paths of Enlightenment
The battle with the Beast is a lost cause for many Kindred.
Over time, the Beast begins to exert a hold that the undead
cannot hope to shake until, finally, the vampire becomes a
vile creature of raw, evil passion. Some vampires, however,
avoid this fate. Even as their Humanity slips away, they
find something else to hold, something else that keeps the
ravenous Beast in check.
The Sabbat has come to call these philosophies the Paths of
Enlightenment, but they existed well before the birth of
that sect. These strict codes define every aspect of their
devotees' existences. Kindred on the Paths become
fanatics, and fanatics they must be lest they lose any
measure of self-control and free will. The Paths are rare
outside the Sabbat, and finding someone to initiate one is
extremely difficult.
A vampire can only follow one Path at a time, and must
begin this journey before the Beast takes control. The few
vampires who develop this sort of self-discipline begin
when they still have two or three points of Humanity. They
will generally hav e another vampire begin their
instruction, and will develop one point in their chosen Path
(at a cost of five experience points). From then on,
additional points cost the current level multiplied by two.
While each Path may have similarities to other Paths, each
is distinct. The moral codes may contain some of the same
values, but the importance is not on which moral traits are
of value, but how much they are valued. While these may
seem like only minor differences, keep in mind that many
major religions are only slightly different from one another
in their moral teachings. Each Path of Enlightenment is
based upon a distinct foundation, but they all represent
methods by which a vampire can transcend mortal
morality and spirituality.
Path Rolls
At the end of the entry for each Path of Enlightenment is a
Hierarchy of Sins. This delineates the morals followers of
that particular Path hold, and their relative importance.
The Path roll is basically the same as a Humanity roll for
another character. Whenever the character does something
she would consider morally wrong, she must make a Path
roll based upon her score in the Path. This should be
handled in the same manner Humanity rolls are handled
for other characters. If a character ever loses all her points
in the Path, the Beast takes over and the Storyteller runs
the character.
Using Paths
Storytellers need to consider carefully the effect the Paths
can have on their chronicles before allowing characters to
develop them. If players know they will never lose their
characters to the Beast, a chronicle can rapidly lose one of
its most interesting aspects.
On the other hand, adding the Paths gives a whole new
dimension to the game, as players begin to explore some of
the most extreme manifestations of the vampiric condition.
Storytellers should strictly monitor adherence to the Paths.
These are not easy avenues to follow and, if characters lose
their way, Storytellers should be fully prepared to have
them fall to the Beast.
As a player or a Storyteller, feel free to invent your own
Paths. While the two here have been developed by neutral
clans (see Chapter Four), others have been developed and
fallen by the wayside. A character could be a member of
one of these extinct Paths, or he could begin his own using
the Paths that follow as models. Just make sure the Path is
rigid enough to prevent a takeover by the Beast.
Additionally, The Players Guide to the Sabbat provides the
seven Paths most common to that sect.
Path of Typhon
Although the Camarilla does not revile the Setites as much
as it does the Sabbat, this is largely because the Setites take
a less active stance against the goals of the Camarilla. The
Camarilla is too busy worrying about the blood -crazed
berserkers of the Black Hand to notice the snakes softly
hissing in the shadows. This ignorance is a terrible
mistake, and one that may well reap a bitter harvest in the
nights to come.
Certainly no Setites are more sinister than those who
follow the shadowy Path of Typhon. The tenets of the Path
of Typhon are anathema to all that most mortals, and
many Kindred, hold dear. To those on this Path,
corruption, pain, lies and sin are things to be cherished
and spread throughout existence. Misery is not a means to
an end, but an end in and of itself.
As far as the followers of Typhon are concerned, everyone
is missing the point. Most systems of belief espouse rigid
control over one's bestial nature in order to overcome and
purge oneself of the world's horrors. The Typhonites
instead espouse the opposite: a complete immersion in
one's weaknesses and an active embrace of the world's
misery. Only through such can evil be understood, and
only through understanding can it truly be purged - or
assimilated. The world is not some pristine, sanitized
Raphaelite heaven, the Typhonites argue, but a filthy
cesspool of agony, struggle and turmoil. True happiness -
fleeting as it is - is only gained through succumbing to
one's carnal desires. One had best understand and accept
where one is before attempting to move on to some vaguely
conceived afterlife.
Of all the Paths, the Path of Typhon is the most like a
religion (as opposed to a philosophy). Its practitioners are
rumored to worship various entities - perhaps
personifications of various sins, perhaps otherwise -
through blood libations and sacrifice. Through such
worship, the Typhonites believe, mystic understanding
may be gleaned.
In order to achieve enlightenment, the followers of this
Path continually seek to spread war, plague, poverty, filth,
stagnation and fear through the world. Through the
creation and study of such phenomena, the Typhonites
hope to discover the truths about, and behind, earthly
existence.
The followers of the Path first practice their tenets upon
others. As they advance in mystic understanding, however,
they even begin to practice their principles upon
themselves; self-flagellation, self-mutilation and other
masochistic depredations are commonplace among the
enlightened. Only through a complete mortification of
15Vampire The Masquerade Second Edition: Players Guide
their flesh may they transcend their earthly limitation s -
and dead flesh is difficult indeed to mortify.
There are rumors that those Setites who progress to the
highest (lowest?) levels of the Path of Typhon become so
riddled with external and internal foulness that they
divorce themselves from any connection to the natural
world whatsoever. Such transcendents devolve into quasi -
organic embodiments of corruption. These stinking,
bloated masses are housed in the depths of the most secret
Setite temples. There they perpetually rot, and wail
blasphemies in the da rk.
Ethics
•
•
•
•
•
•
The ideals of purity and spiritual progress
espoused by the mortals are lies designed to keep
one from one's destiny.
Only in corruption - by succumbing to all that is
considered impure, vile and weak - may true
enlightenment be found. In weakness lies the
greatest strength of all.
Decay is inevitable; struggle against such is futile.
Force others to see themselves as they are, and to
accept what they see.
Mortals are suitable subjects for physiological and
psychological experimentation to advance the arts
of depravity and deformity. Practice such
experiments whenever possible.
Golconda is the ultimate truth, and thus the
ultimate lie. Corrupt its practitioners over all
others. If this cannot be accomplished, destroy
them by the most horrific methods imaginable.
History
This is one of the oldest of the Paths, and is believed to
have been developed by Set himself. If this is true, the
implications are frightening; what could inspire an
Antediluvian, himself a virtual god, to formulate a code of
belief and worship?
The Path, and its followers, have long inspired revulsion
and terror among Kindred and kine alike. Even the
mortals, who have never fully comprehended the nature of
the Path or its followers, have for millennia whispered dark
tales of demonic cults.
Hierarchy of Sins
1 0 - Attempting to maintain any sense of self-control,
purity or worth
9 - Refusing to succumb to one's own weaknesses (this
includes attempting to avoid frenzy or Rotschreck)
8 - Failing to destroy a vampire in Golconda
7 - Destroying a foe expediently and mercifully rather than
"poetically"
6 - Failing to undermine the current social order in favor of
the Setites
5 - Failing to replace faith with cynicism and despair
4 - Failing to exploit another's weaknesses
3 - Allowing one's feelings for a mortal to override the need
to corrupt said mortal
2 - Refusing to corrupt a vampire for the Setites
1 - Not attempting to awaken Set at the earliest opportunity
Path of Paradox
Externally, the Ravnos clan would seem to be the most
human of the independent vampires. After all, the Ravnos
tend to be good-natured tricksters, not ruthless assassins,
corrupters or vile necromancers. They take no active
interest in the most brutal vampiric pursuits and are thus
believed to possess some vestiges of moral and mortal
nature.
Little could be more naive.
Those few who have truly understood the games of the
Ravnos have come away shaken. To the Ravnos who follow
the Path of Paradox, unlife is indeed but a dream, and
living creatures the merest phantasms.
The Path of Paradox teaches that all existence is fluid and
malleable. Nothing is permanent or real. The universe is an
ever -shifting vortex, and all in it is composed of variable
amounts of ethereal matter. This matter is referred to as
"weig" by those on this Path.
In its natural state, weig flows willy - nilly from being to
being, object to object, creating and destroying without
care. A given object can be filled with weig one moment
and nearly empty the next; such is change, such is
existence.
Eons ago, however, a great blasphemy was committed.
Twelve beings who were momentarily filled with great
amounts of weig decided to retain that weig instead of
spewing it into the void when the time came. These beings
then began to suck in even more weig - enough to allow
them power, and mold the surrounding chaos to their will.
These 12 beings became the vampire Antediluvians, and
proceeded to sculpt reality into a fixed shape that would
enable them to retain their weig, and thus their power.
Because even they could not entirely resist the universe's
call to release their weig, the Antediluvians periodically
exuded small amounts of their weig, molding them into
their own images. Thus were other vampires created. Just
as their progenitors blasphemously consume the universe's
weig, so do vampires consume earth's stuff of life, blood.
Of course, the Antediluvians plan to reabsorb their weig in
due time. On this night - the night of Gehenna, or the Flux
- the 12 Antediluvians, acting in concert and devouring the
power of their children, plan to shape the universe
permanently into the gray and stagnant mausoleum-realm
that is their ideal.
The Antediluvians' abomination did not go unnoticed. A
vortex -being, given momentary sentience by a random
fluctuation in t he weig, decided to fight the newly created
Antediluvians on their own terms. This being retained its
own weig, gaining sufficient power in the process to battle
the Antediluvians - indeed, to become as they. This being
sired the Ravnos clan to assist it, and became the 13th
Antediluvian, though only the followers of this Path know
that this "Antediluvian" exists only to disrupt the others'
plans.
Ravnos on this Path gradually learn their raison d'etre: to
destroy the blasphemous creation of the Antediluvians,
that thing known as reality. To effect this, they learn to
harness their internal weig for the production of reality
altering effects. These effects are mere illusions at low
levels of power, but as the Ravnos becomes more powerful,
the effects gradually increase in potency.
Ravnos on this Path also actively attempt to alter others'
perceptions of reality. Their favorite methods for so doing
are through trickery and theft. Such are surprisingly
effective weapons. After all, a hoary old sixth-generation
16Vampire The Masquerade Second Edition: Players Guide
Tremere who loses his pants during a Conclave also loses
the respect of his peers, and his self-confidence;
furthermore, the entire Conclave is disrupted. Thus are a
powerful pawn of the Antediluvians, Clan Tremere, and the
Camarilla all weakened in one fell swoop.
Ultimately, however, the weig must be released into the
vortex. Ravnos who are advanced students of this Path
actively seek to do so. They seek out items that retain weig
- "magic" items, Lupine fetishes, and the like - and destroy
them. The most powerful members of this Path seek out
vampires with great amounts of weig - of low generation -
and do likewise.


Though many followers of this Path are anarchs, not all
are, for such a "party line" would be predictable. Indeed,
there have been occasions when two members of the Path
of Paradox have fought on opposite sides of a cause,
subsequently laughing and reveling in the chaos their
battle incited. Mortals in the Game
Ethics Kevin grunted as he lowered himself through the tiny
skylight. Landing softly on the deep pile of the apartment's
plush carpet, he glanced back once at the skylight,
squinting at the sunlight streaming through the newly
made hole. The blackened glass panels had been even
easier to remove than he had anticipated.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Reality is what one makes it.
Free the weig into the vortex.
This existence is a lie, a fever -dream of the
sleeping Antediluvians, designed to coax us into
waking torpor. Only the gifts of our founder
enable us to unravel the tapestry and weave it
anew into something better.
The farther one is from the Antediluvians, the less
real one is - not that being real necessarily makes
one superior.
The night of the Flux - the night others refer to as
"Gehenna," when reality will be reshaped, for
better or worse draws nigh. The more reality can
be altered between now and that night, the more
confused the Antediluvians will be, and the more
likely it is that the Flux will turn out for the better.
Tricking, confusing and humiliating other
Kindred, particularly those high in the
Antediluvians' esteem, discombobulates the
Ancients and aids our war. Besides, it's fun.
History
But men must know that in this theater of man's life it is
reserved only for God and angels to be lookers on.
- Francis Bacon , The Advancement of Learning
Crossing the hallway in utter silence, Kevin concentrated
on controlling his adrenalin as he slowly approached
Gizelle's resting place. Taking the keys from his pocket, he
rapidly unlocked the numerous bolts and other extraneous
locks.
Once inside, Kevin removed the small pack of tools from
his back and quickly set up his collection of mirrors.
Within minutes the assembly was finished. Pools of
reflected sunlight, large and small, framed the large bed
with its yards of silk and satin frippery. Taking the last
mirror from his pack, Kevin carefully aimed the beam of
reflected sunlight at the tiny foot protruding from under
the covers.
He was rewarded with the sounds of sizzling flesh and a
violent shriek. Kevin watched as the vampire Gizelle
scrambled backwards against the headboard of the bed.
Hissing with pain and rage, Gizelle's dark eyes turned first
to the deadly pools of light surrounding her and then to
Kevin.
This Path arose among the Ravnos in the latter days of the
Roman Empire. Ravnos followers of this Path are believed
to have had much to do with the fall of the Empire (as a
strike against the rigid, boring Ventrue and Lasombra).
Since those days, the followers of this Path have constantly
striven against the evil tomb-thoughts of the Antediluvians
- the vile creations of society, law, shape, matter and
structured reality. The recent breakthroughs in quantum
physics may well be the results of the efforts of those on
this Path. "Howdy, Gizelle. Just thought we should get a few
matters straight here. First off, you probably shouldn't
have sucked Anna dry. Suckin' off people . . . well, that
you gotta do. But diablerie? That's just plain sick.
Anyway, I'm just here to say, do it again and you'll get to
take one last stroll in the sunlight.
Hierarchy of Sins "Oh, and I can see you're anticipatin' me as the next item
on your little menu. Well, take some advice and look
elsewheres. My pals among the Nosferatu wouldn't' t take
kindly to that. Plus there's the little matter of some
information that might just fall into the prince's hands
concerning your recent appetites if somethin' should
happen to me. You know how touchy he is about those
kinds of things.
1 0 - Refusing to commit diablerie upon an elder of another
clan
9 - Refusing to lead a "locked" being into the light - or into
destruction
8 - Showing any concern for mortals
7 - Failing to acquire item s or knowledge that would affect
the Flux
6 - Failing to trick others when the opportunity arises
5 - Being caught altering another's reality via the select
redistribution of possessions (known among the vulgar as
stealing)
4 - Refusing to release the weig of an empowered device
3 - Joining another sect (Camarilla or Sabbat) and actively
maintaining the existing structure thereof
2 - Actively hindering change
1 - Actively inducing boredom
